You bring your newborn home, and for weeks you marvel at your baby who does little more than sleep, eat, pee and cry sometimes. Then one day a few weeks later, she erupts in ear-shattering wails, complete with clenched fists, flailing legs and an unhappy red face. No matter what you try, you can’t comfort your crying baby — and that's not all: She repeats these heartbreaking, stressful episodes every night at the same time for what seems like forever. Welcome to the world of colic.

More in this article:

What is colic?
Colic symptoms
What's the difference between colic and normal crying?
What causes it?
Colic remedies
Should you see the doctor?
Coping with colic
WHAT IS COLIC?
The reality is, all babies cry: It's the best (and only) way for them to communicate their needs at this tender age. And as parents, we’re biologically programmed to respond so those needs get met. But in babies with colic, the crying starts suddenly for no apparent reason … and has no apparent cure.

Colic is not a disease or diagnosis but a combination of baffling behaviors. It's really just a catch-all term for problem crying in otherwise healthy babies — the problem being, there’s no solution to it besides the passing of time. And it’s common, occurring in one in five infants. Episodes can go on for hours at a time, sometimes late into the night. Worst of all, try as you might — and try you will — it's extremely difficult to calm a colicky baby, which only compounds your own frustration, worry and exhaustion.

Doctors usually diagnose colic based on the "rules of three." Your baby's crying:

Lasts at least three hours at a stretch
Occurs at least three days a week
Persists for at least three weeks in a row
Of course, some babies are colic overachievers, wailing for far more hours, days and even weeks at a time.

The good news is that colic doesn't last. Most bouts peak at around 6 weeks and then typically start to taper off by 10 to 12 weeks. By 3 months (typically a little later in preterm babies), most colicky infants seems to be miraculously cured. The colic may stop suddenly — or end gradually, with some good and some bad days, until they are all good.

In the meantime, a little knowledge and a lot of patience will help you survive until the storm subsides.

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF COLIC IN YOUR BABY
How do you know for sure if your baby's colicky? In addition to the rules of three, here are a few further colic signs and symptoms:

Crying occurs at the same time every day (usually in the late afternoon or early evening, but it can vary).
Crying seems to occur for no reason (not because baby has a dirty diaper or is hungry or tired).
Baby may pull up his legs, clench his fists and generally move his legs and arms more.
He also often will close his eyes or open them very wide, furrow his brow, even hold his breath briefly.
Bowel activity may increase, and he may pass gas or spit up.
Eating and sleeping are disrupted by the crying — baby frantically seeks a nipple only to reject it once sucking has begun, or dozes for a few moments only to wake up screaming.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN COLIC AND ORDINARY CRYING?
There isn't a clear definition of exactly what colic is or how (and if) it differs from other types of crying. But doctors typically agree that the difference between colic and ordinary crying in that baby seems inconsolable, crying turns to screaming, and the ordeal lasts for at least three hours and sometimes much longer (occasionally nearly around the clock, much to the tired and fraught parents' dismay). Most often, colicky periods recur daily, though some babies take an occasional night off.

WHAT CAUSES COLIC?
While the exact cause of colic is a mystery, experts do know it’s not the result of genetics or anything that happened during pregnancy or childbirth. Nor is it any reflection on parenting skills (or lack of them, in case you're wondering). And it's also not anyone's fault.

That said, here are some theories on what's behind colicky crying:

Overstimulated senses. One possible explanation: Newborns have a built-in mechanism for tuning out sights and sounds around them, which allows them to sleep and eat without being disturbed by their environment. Near the end of the first month, however, this mechanism disappears — leaving babies more sensitive to the stimuli in their surroundings. With so many new sensations coming at them, some infants become overwhelmed, often at the end of the day. To release that stress, they cry (and cry and cry). Colic ends, the theory goes, when baby learns how to filter out some environmental stimuli and, in doing so, avoids a sensory overload.
An immature digestive system. Digesting food is a big task for a baby's brand new gastrointestinal system. As a result, food may pass through too quickly and not break down completely, resulting in pain from gas in the intestines.
Infant acid reflux. Research has found that infant GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease) is sometimes a colic trigger. Infant GERD is often the result of an underdeveloped lower esophageal sphincter, the muscle that keeps stomach acid from flowing back up into the throat and mouth, which can irritate the esophagus. Symptoms include frequent spitting up, poor eating and irritability during and after feedings. The good news is, most babies outgrow GERD by age 1 (and colic usually goes away long before then).
Food allergies or sensitivity. Some experts believe that colic is the result of an allergy to milk protein (or lactose intolerance) in formula-fed babies. More rarely, colic may be a reaction to specific foods in Mom’s diet in breastfed babies. Either way, these allergies or sensitivity can cause tummy pain that may set off colicky behavior.
Tobacco exposure. Several studies show that moms who smoke during or after pregnancy are more likely to have babies with colic; secondhand smoke may also be a culprit. Though the link exists, it’s unclear how cigarette smoke might be related to colic. The bottom line for many more significant health reasons: Don’t smoke or let anyone else smoke around your baby.
COLIC REMEDIES
In addition to frustration and exhaustion, you may experience feelings of inadequacy and guilt as you try in vain to soothe your baby. So while staying calm is easier said than done, these soothing strategies may help ease the strain until colic passes. Just give each a fair shot before you switch to another (and don't pull out too many tricks at one time, or you'll overload baby's circuits — and step up the crying you're trying to stop).

If you suspect overstimulation:
Respond. Crying is a baby's only way of communicating her needs. But it's also her only way of wielding any control at all over a vast and bewildering new environment: She cries, you come running to her side — powerful stuff when you're otherwise completely powerless. In fact, studies show that responding promptly to your baby's cries will reduce her crying in the long run.
Excise excitement. Limit visitors and exposing your baby to new experiences in stimulating environments, particularly in the late afternoon and early evening. Watch how your baby responds to certain stimuli — and steer clear of any that seem to offend.
Create calm. Trying to make her environment peaceful might help her relax. Dim the lights, speak or sing in soothing tones (or don't speak at all) and keep other noise and distractions to a minimum.
If you suspect gastrointestinal issues:
Apply pressure to baby’s tummy. Some colicky babies find relief when pressure is placed on the abdomen — and the power of touch alone can be very soothing for both mother and child. So place your infant face-down on your lap or upright with his tummy against your shoulder, or try the “colic carry,” where your little one lies face-down with his belly resting on your arm. Then gently rub or pat his back as you hold him.
Ask about antigas drops. Studies show that reducing gas may reduce the discomfort (and crying). So ask your pediatrician about trying gas drops, which can relieve your baby's symptoms. Though research hasn’t yet shown that this treatment definitively helps with colic, your doctor may think it's worth a try.
Consider probiotics. Probiotic drops may curb the crying in some colicky babies, probably because they ease tummy troubles (probiotic bacteria grow naturally in the digestive tract and help promote intestinal health). Again, research has yet to back this up, but check with your pediatrician to see if you should give it a go.
Try gripe water. In the category of “little evidence, lots of anecdotes” is gripe water, a natural colic remedy made of herbs and sodium bicarbonate in drops. Many parents swear by gripe water, but no reliable studies have shown its effectiveness in reducing colic symptoms. And just because something is natural doesn't mean it's safe — so always ask your doctor before giving your baby that or any other herbal remedies.
Watch what you eat. If you’re breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about whether you should try temporarily eliminating any foods from your diet that can cause tummy troubles, such as gas-causing cruciferous veggies (cabbage, cauliflower), acidic citrus fruits ,or allergenic foods (dairy, soy, wheat, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, fish).
Ask about switching formulas. For some formula-fed infants, swapping a standard variety for one designed for sensitive tummies or one that doesn't contain cow's milk can make a difference. Studies have found that giving colicky babies hypoallergenic whey-hydrolyzed formula decreases colic symptoms in some babies. Just be sure to get your doctor’s approval before making the switch. Also, steer clear of casein-hydrolyzed formula or partially hydrolyzed formulas as therapies for colic — there simply isn't enough evidence that they work.
Remember, you should never give your baby any medication, herbal or otherwise, without talking to your pediatrician first. And always talk to your doctor before making major changes in your diet or your baby’s.

Other calming remedies for colicky babies:
Get close. Not only does cuddling, wearing or carrying your baby give her the pleasure of security and physical closeness to you (and after 9 months of constant closeness, that may be just what baby's crying for), but it may help you tune in better to her needs.
Swaddle. Toss a blanket in the dryer and while it's still warm, wrap it snugly around your baby. The combination of warmth and the feeling of security may help dry baby’s tears.
Make white noise. The hum of the vacuum cleaner or dryer can be comforting to babies (it reminds them of the womb). You may even want to invest in a white-noise machine.
Play soothing music. A crying baby might also respond to the quiet singing of a lullaby or a softly playing classical music CD. Other infants enjoy the sounds of nature or the whir of a fan. Repeating "shh" or "ahh" to your little one can also help. Experiment to find something your baby seems to like.
Offer a pacifier. Some colicky babies seem to want to eat all the time — and that might be because sucking is soothing, not because they’re hungry. So if your child seems ravenous all the time and adequate feedings don't seem to satisfy him, a pacifier might help. Check in with your doctor if you're not sure whether baby is getting enough to eat at mealtimes, though.
Get out of the house. Sometimes, just a change to an outdoor location will magically change a baby's mood. Movement can help, too. Take your baby for a walk in the stroller or in a sling or carrier, or strap her into the car seat for a drive (but turn around and head home if the crying continues in the car — otherwise it could distract you from the road).
SHOULD I TAKE MY BABY TO THE DOCTOR?
While the odds are that your baby’s daily screaming sessions are due to colic, it’s a good idea to talk the situation over with your doctor — if only to get some reassurance and maybe a few extra soothing strategies. Describing the crying (its duration, intensity, pattern, any variation from the norm and any accompanying symptoms) will also help the doctor rule out any underlying medical condition (like reflux, an infection or a milk allergy) that could be triggering the crying.

FOR PARENTS: COPING WITH COLIC
Though it can safely be said that even hours and hours of daily crying doesn't seem to hurt a baby, it certainly does leave its mark on parents. Listening to a baby's screams can be heartbreaking, upsetting and anxiety-provoking and can take a physical and emotional toll. To cope with colicky crying that just won't quit, try the following:

Break it up. A fresh set of arms sometimes induces calm in a crying baby. If there are two parents at home during baby's witching hours, make sure colic duty is divided up equally between the two of you (an hour on, an hour off, a night on, a night off, or whatever arrangement works best).
Take a break. It's important to respond to crying, which is an infant's only way to communicate. But every once in a while, taking a 10- to 15- minute break during a particularly trying crying marathon won't hurt — and it might help both of you get through this challenging phase of babyhood.
Tune out a little. Use earplugs, noise-canceling headphones or listen to music to lessen the effect of your baby's wails. Don't tune out your baby so much that you can't hear him at all or for long periods of time, but at least the bouts of wailing won't be as loud for a little while.
Talk about it. Do a little crying yourself — on a willing shoulder: your spouse's, the pediatrician's, a family member's, a friend's. Just knowing you're not alone in the world of inconsolable babies can make a world of difference.
Get help. If you’re at the end of your rope, don’t hesitate ask for help — whether from your partner, mother, friend or babysitter.
Keep in mind, too, that this shall pass: Just when you think you can't take another night of it, the crying will let up — and then it's gone forever. As wiped-out as you may be, give yourself a well-earned pat on the back. You've just survived your first major challenge of parenthood.

Baby colic, also known as infantile colic, is defined as episodes of crying for more than three hours a day, for more than three days a week, for three weeks in an otherwise healthy child. Often crying occurs in the evening.[1] It typically does not result in long term problems.[2] The crying can cause frustration for the parents, depression following delivery, excess visits to the doctor, and child abuse.[1]

The cause of colic is unknown.[1] Some believe it is due to gastrointestinal discomfort like intestinal cramping.[3] Diagnosis requires ruling out other possible causes. Concerning findings include a fever, poor activity, or a swollen abdomen. Fewer than 5% of infants with excess crying have an underlying organic disease.[1]

Treatment is generally conservative, with little to no role for either medications or alternative therapies.[4] Extra support for the parents may be useful.[1] Tentative evidence supports certain probiotics for the baby and a low-allergen diet by the mother in those who are breastfed.[1] Hydrolyzed formula may be useful in those who are bottlefeed.[1]

Colic affects 10–40% of children. It is most common at six weeks of age and typically goes away by six months of age.[1] It rarely lasts up to one year of age.[5] It occurs at the same rate in boys and in girls.[1] The first detailed medical description of the problem occurred in 1954.[6]

Contents  [hide]
1   Signs and symptoms
1.1 Effect on the family
2   Causes
3   Diagnosis
4   Treatment
4.1 Medication
4.2 Diet
4.3 Alternative medicine
5   Prognosis
6   Epidemiology
7   History
8   References
9   External links
Signs and symptoms[edit]
Colic is defined as episodes of crying for more than three hours a day, for more than three days a week for a three-week duration in an otherwise healthy child between the ages of two weeks and four months.[7] By contrast, infants normally cry an average of just over two hours a day, with the duration peaking at six weeks.[8] With colic, periods of crying most commonly happen in the evening and for no obvious reason.[1] Associated symptoms may include legs pulled up to the stomach, a flushed face, clenched hands, and a wrinkled brow.[8] The cry is often high pitched (piercing).[8]

Effect on the family[edit]
An infant with colic may affect family stability and be a cause of short-term anxiety or depression in the father and mother.[8] It may also contribute to exhaustion and stress in the parents.[9]

Persistent infant crying has been associated with severe marital discord, postpartum depression, early termination of breastfeeding, frequent visits to doctors, and a quadrupling of excessive laboratory tests and prescription of medication for acid reflux.[citation needed] Babies with colic may be exposed to abuse, especially shaken baby syndrome.[8]

Causes[edit]
The cause of colic is generally unknown. Fewer than 5% of infants who cry excessively turn out to have an underlying organic disease, such as constipation, gastroesophageal reflux disease, lactose intolerance, anal fissures, subdural hematomas, or infantile migraine.[8] Babies fed cow's milk have been shown to develop antibody responses to the bovine protein, causing colic.[10][11] Studies performed showed conflicting evidence about the role of cow's milk allergy.[8] While previously believed to be related to gas pains, this does not appear to be the case.[8] Another theory holds that colic is related to hyperperistalsis of the digestive tube (increased level of activity of contraction and relaxation). The evidence that the use of anticholinergic agents improve colic symptoms supports this hypothesis.[8] Other theories involve the so-called "fourth trimester" where it is thought a baby is not ready for life outside the womb and therefore reacts to this by crying [12]

Psychological and social factors have been proposed as a cause, but there is no evidence. Studies performed don't support the theory that maternal (or paternal) personality or anxiety causes colic, nor that it is a consequence of a difficult temperament of the baby, but families with colicky children may eventually develop anxiety, fatigue and problems with family functioning as a result.[8] There is some evidence that cigarette smoke may increase the risk.[7] It seems unrelated to breast or bottle feeding with rates similar in both groups.[13]

Birth complications may have a direct impact on the infant. Researchers have found correlations between childbirth complications and amount of infant crying. More stressful deliveries were linked to more crying.[14]

Some researchers have proposed that colic is an evolved strategy of deception: colicky babies get more attention than other babies. The rate of colic represents a compromise between the evolutionary need for reliable infant communication and the individual benefit of this deception. "If every infant had these genes for colic, it would not work," says Maestripieri, a primatologist at the University of Chicago. "But if it's rare enough so that parents don't know if they're being honest or not, it works." [15]

Diagnosis[edit]
Colic is diagnosed after other potential causes of crying are excluded.[8] This can typically be done via a history and physical exam, and in most cases tests such as X-rays or blood tests are not needed.[8] Babies who cry may simply be hungry, uncomfortable, or ill.[16]

Cause for concern include: an elevated temperature, a history of breathing problems or a child who is not appropriately gaining weight.[8]

"Red flag" indicating that further investigations may be needed include:[17]

Vomiting (vomit that is green or yellow, bloody or occurring more than 5/day)
Change in stool (constipation or diarrhea, especially with blood or mucous)
Abnormal temperature (a rectal temperature less than 97.0 °F (36.1 °C) or over 100.4 °F (38.0 °C)
Irritability (crying all day with few calm periods in between)
Lethargy (excess sleepiness, lack of smiles or interested gaze, weak sucking lasting over 6 hours)
Poor weight gain (gaining less than 15 grams a day)
Problems to consider when the above are present include:[17]

Infections (e.g. ear infection, urine infection, meningitis, appendicitis)
Intestinal pain (e.g. food allergy, acid reflux, constipation, intestinal blockage)
Trouble breathing (e.g. from a cold, excessive dust, congenital nasal blockage, oversized tongue)
Increased brain pressure (e.g., hematoma, hydrocephalus)
Skin pain (e.g. a loose diaper pin, irritated rash, a hair wrapped around a toe)
Mouth pain (e.g. yeast infection)
Kidney pain (e.g. blockage of the urinary system)
Eye pain (e.g. scratched cornea, glaucoma)
Overdose (e.g. excessive Vitamin D, excessive sodium)
Others (e.g. migraine headache, heart failure, hyperthyroidism)
Persistently fussy babies with poor weight gain, vomiting more than 5 times a day, or other significant feeding problems should be evaluated for other illnesses (e.g. urinary infection, intestinal obstruction, acid reflux).[18]

Treatment[edit]
Management of colic is generally conservative and involves the reassurance of parents.[8] Calming measures may be used and include: swaddling with the legs flexed, holding the baby on its side or stomach, swinging the baby side to side or back and forth while supporting the head, making a shushing sound, and breast feeding or the use of a pacifier.[7] Eye contact, talking, and holding an infant are also reasonable measures,[7] though is not entirely clear if these actions have any effect beyond placebo.[8][19]

Medication[edit]
No medications have been found to be both safe and effective.[7] Simethicone is safe but does not appear to work, while dicyclomine works but is not safe.[8] Evidence does not support the use of cimetropium bromide,[19] and there is little evidence for alternative medications or techniques.[20]

Diet[edit]
Dietary changes by infants are generally not needed.[8] In mothers who are breastfeeding, a hypoallergenic diet by the mother — not eating milk and dairy products, eggs, wheat, and nuts — may improve matters,[8][9][21] while elimination of only cow’s milk does not seem to produce any improvement.[21] In formula-fed infants, switching to a soy-based or hydrolyzed protein formula may help.[9] Evidence of benefit is greater for hydrolyzed protein formula with the benefit from soy based formula being disputed.[22][23] Additionally both these formulas have greater cost and are not as palatable.[23] Supplementation with fiber has no benefit.[9]

Alternative medicine[edit]
No clear beneficial effect from spinal manipulation[24][25] or massage has been shown.[8] No evidence supports the efficacy of so-called "gripe water", and its use poses risks, especially in formulations that include alcohol or sugar.[8] Evidence does not support lactase,[19] or supplementing formula with probiotics.[26]

The use of the probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri in babies who are breastfed has tentative evidence.[1][27]

Prognosis[edit]
Infants who are colicky do just as well as their non colicky peers with respect to temperament at one year of age.[8]

Epidemiology[edit]
Colic affects 5–25% of children,[8] occurring at the same rate in boys and in girls.[13]

History[edit]
The word "colic" is derived from the ancient Greek word for intestine (sharing the same root as the word "colon").[28]

It has been an age-old practice to drug crying infants. During the second century AD, the Greek physician Galen prescribed opium to calm fussy babies, and during the Middle Ages in Europe, mothers and wet nurses smeared their nipples with opium lotions before each feeding. Alcohol was also commonly given to infants.[29]

In past decades, doctors recommended treating colicky babies with sedative medications (e.g. phenobarbital, Valium, alcohol), analgesics (e.g. opium) or anti-spasm drugs (e.g. scopolamine, Donnatal, dicyclomine), but all of these are no longer recommended because of potential serious side-effects, including death.[citation needed]

When you're a new mom or dad, it can be a huge challenge to parent a baby who's always cranky. Friends may say your baby is "colicky." What’s going on and how can you make it through this?

What Is Colic?

Colic is a bit of a mystery. The term applies to any healthy, well-fed infant who cries more than 3 hours a day, more than 3 days a week, for more than 3 weeks. Here's what we know about it:

Colic is likely to start around age 2 weeks if your infant is full-term (or later if premature).
It almost always goes away on its own by 3 or 4 months.
Your baby's sex and birth order, and whether you breast- or bottle-feed, don’t affect it.
Kids who had colic as babies are no different from those who didn’t.
What Causes Colic?

Colic’s exact cause is unknown, and that's why there’s not a clear way to help it. Some theories of what’s behind it include:

A growing digestive system with muscles that often spasm
Gas
Hormones that cause stomach pain or a fussy mood
Oversensitivity or overstimulation by light, noise, etc.
A moody baby
A still-developing nervous system

Remember, there are many things that can seem like colic but aren’t. If you're concerned about your baby, your doctor can do a full exam to rule out a medical cause for why your baby cries and is fussy. She could be irritable because of:

An infection
Acid reflux or stomach problems
Pressure or inflammation of the brain and nervous system
Eye trouble, like a scratch or increased pressure
Irregular heartbeat
Injury to bones, muscles, or fingers
How to Treat Colic

Based on your baby's needs for colic, your doctor can help. You'll likely have to try one thing at a time to see if it calms her. If it doesn't in a few days, move on to another one.

You may find one you think works. Know that colic can get better on its own and you may just have to wait for the fussiness to improve on its own at 4 months or so.

Beware of "cures" that claim to work for all babies. There is no such thing. Here are some things to try to ease colic.

What to Do When Colic Is Stressing You Out

It's a challenge when you have a baby with colic. Know that it's normal and common to sometimes feel angry or resentful toward your cranky little one. You are not a bad parent to feel that way, so don't feel guilty. Everyone has these feelings sometime.

If you’re at the end of the rope, remember it is OK to leave baby in his crib or play pen for a short time while you leave the room to collect yourself.

My baby cries all the time. Could it be colic?

Colic is uncontrollable crying in an otherwise healthy baby. Your baby is considered colicky if he’s younger than 5 months old and cries for more than three hours in a row on three or more days a week for at least three weeks (phew!). Colic isn't a disease and won't cause your baby any long-term harm, but it's a tough thing to go through for babies and their parents.

If your baby is colicky, find more than 20 sanity-saving tips to help you deal with it in our article about coping with colic.

What are the symptoms of colic?

Colic most often shows up when a baby is 2 or 3 weeks old (or two or three weeks after his due date if he's a preemie).

Babies normally cry when they're wet, hungry, frightened, or tired, but a baby with colic cries excessively, often at the same time of day (usually in the late afternoon or evening). If your baby is colicky, you may notice that his cries at this time are louder and higher pitched than his normal crying and that the episodes start and end suddenly.

Your colicky baby may also show signs of a gassy tummy. Gas doesn't cause colic, but he might be extra gassy because a baby with colic often swallows air when he cries. You may notice that your colicky baby clenches his fingers, arches his back, becomes flushed, and alternately extends or pulls up his legs and passes gas as he cries. He may sometimes feel better after passing gas or having a bowel movement.

How long does colic last?

Thankfully, there's a light at the end of the tunnel. Colic tends to peak around 6 weeks, and then improves significantly between 3 and 4 months. By 4 months of age, 80 to 90 percent of infants are over colic. The remaining small percentage might take another month.

Yes, that's a long tunnel. In the meantime, learn how to comfort your baby as best you can and ask for help when you need it. Caring for a colicky baby can be very stressful, and you need to take regular breaks to maintain your own well-being. Have your partner or a friend or relative take over while you go for a walk or let loose with a good cry yourself when you need to.

Why are some babies colicky?

Colic is one of the great mysteries of baby life. Experts estimate that between 8 and 40 percent of babies become colicky. The condition is equally common among firstborn and later-born babies, among boys and girls, and among breastfed and formula-fed infants. No one knows why some babies are more prone to it than others, but theories abound. And there may well be more than one cause.

We do know that babies born to mothers who smoked during pregnancy or postpartum are at increased risk of colic (though this risk is reduced if the baby is breastfed).

Some experts believe that long bouts of colicky crying are a physical release for sensitive babies. By the time evening rolls around, they say, these babies just can't handle any more sights, sounds, or sensations, and so they become distraught and cry.

Another theory is that colic is sometimes caused by an imbalance of healthy bacteria in the intestines. Studies have shown that infants with colic have different intestinal microflora than infants who don't suffer from colic. Treatment with probiotics (specifically Lactobacillus reuteri) has been shown to help with colic symptoms in some babies. Ask your doctor for a specific probiotic recommendation.

Should I take my baby to the doctor if I think he has colic?

Yes, it's a good idea to talk with a doctor about your baby's crying. She can rule out other potential causes, like intestinal problems or urinary infections, and she'll want to check that your baby is feeding and growing normally. She'll also help you determine the best course of action for your baby if he does have colic.

And if your baby has other symptoms – like fever, vomiting, or bloody stools – call his doctor immediately. These symptoms are not due to colic.

Can a food allergy cause colic?

One of the things the doctor might consider is whether your baby might have an intolerance for or an allergy to cow's milk protein. Although it doesn't cause colic, it is one of the culprits of tummy trouble that mimics colic. If this is the case for your formula-fed baby, his doctor may recommend switching to a hydrolysated formula (one in which the protein has been broken down). If cow's milk protein is a problem for your baby, his symptoms will probably improve a week or so after the change in formula.

If your baby is breastfed, following a nondairy diet may be worth a try, even though there's no conclusive evidence that it helps. If you're breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about cutting back on milk, cheese, and yogurt for a couple of weeks to see whether it makes a difference. (Cow's milk protein can remain in breast milk that long, so this dietary experiment takes some patience.)

If you're breastfeeding, it's also possible that your baby is sensitive to something in your diet other than dairy products. There's plenty of controversy about which foods are problematic (and the data is conflicting), but the prime suspects seem to be wheat, eggs, nuts, fruit, caffeine, and chocolate.

To see whether one of these foods is making your baby uncomfortable, avoid them all for a few days. If your baby seems better, reintroduce one food at a time, allowing a few days between reintroductions. If your baby starts fussing again after you start eating a certain food, you may have discovered the offending substance. Talk with your doctor if you notice a certain food makes your baby fussy.

Can gripe water help with colic?

Many parents recommend gripe water or antigas (simethicone/mylicon) drops, which are sold over-the-counter, to soothe your baby’s discomfort – though neither has been proven effective.

See our article on coping with colic for suggestions for calming your baby and managing your own stress.

Fussing and crying are normal for infants, and a fussy baby doesn't necessarily have colic. In an otherwise healthy, well-fed baby, signs of colic include:

Predictable crying episodes. A baby who has colic often cries about the same time every day, usually in the late afternoon or evening. Colic episodes may last from a few minutes to three hours or more on any given day. Your baby may have a bowel movement or pass gas near the end of the colic episode.
Intense or inconsolable crying. Colic crying is intense, sounds distressed and is often high pitched. Your baby's face may flush, and he or she is extremely difficult — if not impossible — to comfort.
Crying that occurs for no apparent reason. It's normal for babies to cry sometimes. But, crying usually means your baby needs something, such as food or a clean diaper. Crying associated with colic occurs with no clear cause.
Posture changes. Curled up legs, clenched fists and tensed abdominal muscles are common during colic episodes.
Colic is common. It usually starts a few weeks after birth and often improves by age 3 months. By ages 4 to 5 months, the majority of babies with colic have improved.

When to see a doctor

Seek immediate medical attention if your baby's crying could be the result of a fall, injury or illness.

Contact your baby's doctor if:

You notice a bluish-cast to your baby's lips or skin during a crying episode.
You're concerned about your baby's crying, especially if you notice changes in your baby's eating, sleeping or behavior.
You can help your baby's doctor by tracking in a diary when your baby cries and for how long. Also record your baby's sleeping and eating patterns.

The cause of colic is unknown. Researchers have explored a number of possibilities, including allergies, lactose intolerance, changes in the normal bacteria found in the digestive system, a digestive system that hasn't fully developed, anxious parents, and differences in the way a baby is fed or comforted. Yet it's still unclear why some babies have colic and others don't.

Infants of mothers who smoke during pregnancy or after delivery have a greater risk of developing colic.

Many other theories about what makes a child more susceptible to colic have been proposed, but none have been proved. For instance:

Colic doesn't occur more often among firstborns or formula-fed babies.
A breast-feeding mother's diet probably doesn't trigger colic.
Girls and boys — no matter what their birth order or how they're fed — experience colic in similar numbers.

Infantile colic can be distressing to parents whose infant is inconsolable during crying episodes. Colic is often defined by the “rule of three”: crying for more than three hours per day, for more than three days per week, and for longer than three weeks in an infant who is well-fed and otherwise healthy. The physician’s role is to ensure that there is no organic cause for the crying, offer balanced advice on treatments, and provide support to the family. Colic is a diagnosis of exclusion that is made after performing a careful history and physical examination to rule out less common organic causes. Treatment is limited. Feeding changes usually are not advised. Medications available in the United States have not been proved effective in the treatment of colic, and most behavior interventions have not been proved to be more effective than placebo. Families may turn to untested resources for help, and the physician should offer sound advice about these treatments. Above all, parents need reassurance that their baby is healthy and that colic is self-limited with no long-term adverse effects. Physicians should watch for signs of continuing distress in the child and family, particularly in families whose resources are strained already.

Excessive crying or colic in an infant during the first few months of life can be alarming for physicians and parents. Estimates of the occurrence of infantile colic in community-based samples vary from 5 to 25 percent of infants, depending on study design, definition of colic, and method of data collection.1,2 Fussing and crying are normal aspects of development during the first three months of life. During this time, infants cry an average of 2.2 hours per day, peaking at six weeks of age and gradually decreasing.3 Parents who think their infant cries excessively may seek a physician’s help.

Abstract
Excessive crying, often described as infantile colic, is the cause of 10% to 20% of all early pediatrician visits of infants aged 2 weeks to 3 months. Although usually benign and self- limiting, excessive crying is associated with parental exhaustion and stress. However, an underlying organic cause is found in less than 5% of these infants. In the majority of cases, treatment consists not of “curing the colic,” although usually it is possible to reduce crying, but of helping the parents to get through this challenging period in their baby’s develop- ment. The aims of this review are to discuss de nition, etiology, and evaluate different treat- ment regimes in infants who cry excessively.

Samira Akhnikh, MD, is from the Depart- ment of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nu- trition, Emma Children’s Hospital/Academic Medical Center. Adèle C. Engelberts, MD, PhD, is from the Department of Pediatrics, Orbis Medical Center. Bregie E. van Sleuw- en, PhD, is from the TNO Child Health. Mo- nique P. L’Hoir, PhD, is from the TNO Child Health. Marc A. Benninga, MD, PhD, is from the Department of Pediatric Gastroenterol- ogy and Nutrition Emma Children’s Hospi- tal/Academic Medical Center.
Address correspondence to: Marc A. Benninga, MD, PhD, Department of Pediat- ric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Emma Children’s Hospital/Academic Medical Cen- ter, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands; email: m.a.benninga@ amc.nl.
Disclosure: The authors have no relevant  nancial relationships to disclose.
doi: 10.3928/00904481-20140325-07
 PEDIATRIC ANNALS 43:4 | APRIL 2014
Healio.com/Pediatrics | e69
CME
© Shutterstock
 Infants’ crying is regarded as a nor- Others argue, however, that the rule colic or excessive infant crying, with in-
mal part of neurobehavioral devel-
opment. It follows a typical curve that peaks during the sixth week post- partum at a stable mean duration of 110 to 118 minutes per day, and declines to below 1 hour per day by 12 weeks of age (Figure 1).1-3 In the  rst weeks of life, crying concentrates speci cally in late afternoon.4 Infants who are born pre- term experience their peak in crying at 6 weeks corrected age and thus appear to have a delayed peak to their parents.5 Often, the increase in crying coincides with dismissal from the neonatal ward and can cause anxiety and loss of con-  dence in parents. Due to the speci c age-related pattern, it has been thought that there is a correlation with the devel- opment of a circadian rhythm.6
DEFINITION OF EXCESSIVE CRYING
Despite its potentially substantial negative health consequences, no con- sensus has been reached on the de nition of excessive crying for young infants.7 It is important to stress that every de nition of excessive crying for infants relates only to healthy, well-developing babies. Since the crying bouts occur without ob- vious cause, their unexplained nature is one of the main reasons for parents’ con- cerns. The most commonly used de ni- tion is Wessel’s “rule of three,” which states that crying in an otherwise healthy baby aged 2 weeks to 4 months that oc- curs more than 3 hours per day, more than 3 days in any week for at least 3 weeks may be called excessive.8 In 2006, a panel of experts in the  eld of pediatric gastroenterology de ned infant colic as including all of the following in infants from birth to 4 months of age: 1) par- oxysms of irritability, fussing, or crying that start and stop without obvious cause; 2) episodes lasting 3 or more hours per day and occurring at least 3 days per week for at least 1 week; and 3) absence of failure to thrive.9
of three has proved to be impractical to apply, culturally biased, overly-depen- dent on the amount of crying, and in- sensitive to features such as the hard-to- soothe nature of crying that underlie its impact on parents.10
Reijneveld et al.7 showed that 10 rela- tively small differences in the de nition of excessive crying lead to the inclu- sion of dissimilar groups of infants. It
Contrasting opinions exist regarding the relationship between gastrointestinal causes and excessive crying.
is therefore of major importance that re- searchers in the  eld of excessive crying and functional gastrointestinal disease use the same, clearly described de ni- tion, preferably including both duration of crying and parental distress. Either an e-diary or a paper diary is useful in objectively measuring both duration of crying and behavior of caregivers.11 This will improve the comparability of stud- ies regarding insights in cause and treat- ment of these infants.
Many infants cry excessively in the  rst 3 months of life, and this can cause much parental stress and even depres- sion. In a study of 3,259 infants aged 6 months attending a well-baby clinic, nearly 6% of all parents reported taking at least one action to stop their infant’s crying that could be considered danger- ous or leading to child abuse (ie, smoth- ering, slapping, or shaking); one in  ve admitted to more than one of these three interventions.12 There is evidence that suggests that especially high-pitched crying leads to a more harsh response from the caregiver.13 Higher scores on the Edinburgh postnatal depression scale were found in mothers who reported
creased odds of high scores at 6 months
14 even if the crying was resolved.
ETIOLOGY
The etiology of excessive crying re- mains unclear, although it has been ap- preciated as a manifestation of normal infant behavior and development. It has been suggested that there is an imbal- ance of the central nervous system in infants who cry excessively.15 The fact that neurologically impaired children can have abnormal cry characteristics, (eg, the  at, high-pitched cry typical in Cri du Chat syndrome) offers some sup- port for this theory, as does the fact that preterm infants and small-for-date in- fants are at increased risk for excessive crying.16 Others have proposed a major role for environmental factors, such as psychosocial issues, domestic violence, inadequate parent-infant interaction, or parental anxiety.17,18 A major consider- ation is, of course, whether the parental anxiety and even depression is caused by the excessive crying or vice versa. Also, it would seem logical that parental problems can in uence the perception of their child’s crying. A nested case- control study in Turkey showed that infant colic was associated with various perinatal factors (maternal education, smoking habits, hostility scores, and domestic violence), and having colic in infancy negatively affected the sleeping pattern and the height of the infant.19 In a large prospective study, the risk of having an excessively crying infant was signi cantly increased if mothers or fa- thers had depressive symptoms during the pregnancy.15
Contrasting opinions exist regarding the relationship between gastrointesti- nal causes, such as lactose intolerance, cow’s milk allergy, and gastroesopha- geal re ux disease, and excessive cry- ing. There is no evidence for an as- sociation between lactose intolerance and soy feeds and excessive crying.
  e70 | Healio.com/Pediatrics
PEDIATRIC ANNALS 43:4 | APRIL 2014
CME

Furthermore, if there are no other symp- toms of cow’s milk allergy, there is little evidence that this would explain the infant’s excessive crying. Several well-designed, randomized, controlled trials have clearly shown that there was no difference in ef cacy between the use of proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) and placebo in infants with excessive crying and suspected gastroesophageal re ux (GER).20 Indeed, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advises to only use PPIs for infants with an en- doscopically documented acid-induced condition such as erosive esophagitis.21 Furthermore, they stated that the risk- bene t relationship between the admin- istration of PPIs in infants with GER or gastroesophageal re ux (GERD) with- out a documented acid-induced condi- tion is not favorable because no bene t can be attributed to the PPI.21
In recent years, it has been suggested that aberrancies in the infant intestinal microbiota affect gut motor function and gas production, leading to abdominal pain and excessive crying. For example, studies have shown that the intestinal microbiota in infants with colic differs from that of healthy control infants, with lower counts of lactobacilli and higher numbers of Gram-negative bacteria in stools of infants with excessive cry- ing.22,23 A recent study in infants with colic showed a signi cantly reduced mi- crobiota diversity at 14 and 28 days of life.24 In addition, proteobacteria were increased in infants with colic, whereas bi dobacteria and lactobacilli were in- creased in control infants.24
Two European studies including more than 8,000 infants showed that smoking by either one or both parents of more than 15 cigarettes a day was associated with a doubled risk of exces- sive crying.25,26 Whether this association is causal is unknown. There is no evi- dence for an effect of smoking through breastfeeding.27 Smoking during preg- nancy was not associated with exces-
Figure 1. Crying amounts and patterns from three North American studies illustrating absence of secu- lar trend. (Adapted from Barr et al.3)
 180
160
140
120
100
80 60 40 20
0
      W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6 W7 W8 W9 W10 W11 W12
Recording Week
PEDIATRIC ANNALS 43:4 | APRIL 2014
Healio.com/Pediatrics | e71
sive crying in a Dutch study, whereas in contrast, a Danish study found a signi - cant association between smoking in the pregnancy and excessive crying.25,26
It is important to note that a retro- spective review of 237 afebrile patients younger than 1 year of age who pre- sented at an emergency department with a chief complaint of crying, irritability, screaming, colic, or fussiness showed that only 5.1% of the children had a serious underlying cause. Urinary tract infections were the most prevalent medi- cal condition, especially in very young infants.28 Therefore, afebrile infants who cry excessively in the  rst few months of life should undergo urine evaluation.
TREATMENT AND SUPPORT OF CHILDREN AND PARENTS
In this part of the review, the support of families with an excessively crying infant is described. There is often in- suf cient evidence to  rmly advocate a speci c treatment. These families need
support, however, to prevent a large de- mand on health care, serious psychoso- cial effects on families, and behavioral problems later on. The following gives a practical approach to support the fami- lies based on what evidence there is.
Each intake of parents with an exces- sively crying infant should begin with:
• Recognition, support, and reassur- ance of parents.
• Information about the normal cry- ing pattern, co- and self-regulation, and about the prevention of the shaken baby syndrome/abusive head trauma.
• Full cooperation between caregiver and parents. This empowers parents, who may lose con dence in their parenting abilities, and ensures com- pliance with the chosen strategy.
• Referral to the family doctor or pediatrician to rule out medical problems should take place early on. (Treatment that follows from a medical diagnosis such as cow’s
 CME
 Minutes/Day of Distress
 milk allergy or a urinary tract in- fection will not be discussed in this review.)
• Discourage change of feeds (from breast to formula or from one for- mula to another). Breastfeeding should not be stopped in order to reduce excessive crying.
• The relationship between parents, child, and the health care worker is of great importance and may need some time to develop. If problems are complex, it is preferable to con- sult other professionals for advice instead of immediately referring parents, thus preventing “shopping behavior.” The proposed care can be given by the health care worker, general practitioner, or pediatrician.
INFORMING AND COUNSELING PARENTS
If the health care professional is con- vinced that the issue at hand involves an “excessively crying infant” — which means that a medical explanation in all reasonableness has been excluded — par- ents should be informed extensively about the normal pattern of infant crying as de- scribed previously. This normal period can feel endlessly long and very stressful for the parents, child, and his or her siblings. Excessive crying is often related to fatigue of both the child and his or her parents.1
Explicitly point out that in 95% of cases, no physical or health problems are found. Inform parents about warning signs for ill health, such as poor growth. Furthermore, most children cry more at the end of the day, and there are no ill- nesses that occur only between the hours of 6 to 8 p.m. It is important to explain how stress affects both parents and the child. A baby who, for any reason, is off balance (eg, due to illness or fatigue) cries more, thus demanding more care, and thereby may bring the parent(s) out of balance, which in turn will affect the baby, etc. Parents and child end up in a vicious circle.1 If parents, after this ex-
planation and with ongoing support, fail to restore normal interaction, appropri- ate professionals should be consulted.
Often parents receive many types of advice, sometimes con icting. It is im- portanttosettleuponaplanwiththepar- ents and agree to stick to it. This can only work if, through support and compassion, a relationship has been formed based on
A baby who, for any reason, is off balance (eg, due to illness or fatigue) cries more, thus demanding more care.
trust. The treatment or support given must be in line with the views of the parents and  t the family system. Each interven- tion may take some time to achieve re- sults, and parents should be aware of this. Parents can choose one of the approaches classi ed as “evidence-based,” albeit at quite different levels of evidence.
TREATMENTS FOR WHICH THERE IS SOME EVIDENCE
Applying Regularity and Uniformity in Daily Care
A consistent, recurring pattern of childcare throughout the day is bene - cial.29-33 The behavioral components of the intervention include regularity in the sequence of the events surrounding sleep and feeding and uniformity in the place where the child sleeps and plays on his or her own.34 It should be emphasized that this does not mean a  xed time schedule, but instead, rather, a consistent approach. This comprises a recurring pattern of sleeping, feeding right after waking, positive interaction/cuddling and play- ing with a parent, playing on their own (preferably in a playpen), and being put to bed awake as soon as signs of weari- ness appear (eg, yawning, whining, rub- bing of eyes, overactive behavior). This
approach offers the child predictability and the possibility to improve his or her self-regulating ability. It has proved to be effective in healthy parents, even those with mild psychological problems.35 Speci cattentionisofferedtomothers who breastfeed, as this should be con- tinued. If this approach is not effective, it can be helpful to add swaddling.29 Al- though not more effective, it does reduce crying more quickly. Health care provid- ers should be clear about indications and contraindications for swaddling.34
Video Home Training (VHT)36
VHT is intended for parents with parenting stress. Its purpose is to solve problems in the socio-emotional devel- opment of the child (0-4 years). It has been shown to be effective in improving the interaction and communication be- tween parents and child and in improv- ing the interaction between depressed mothers and their babies.36-39 However, there have been no studies speci cally conducted on improving the interaction in families with an excessively crying infant. In theory, if interaction issues play a role and parental sensitivity could be improved upon, one would assume VHT can be bene cial. However, a cau-
tious approach is warranted.
Baby Massage
A Cochrane review showed that baby massage may have a bene cial effect for infants younger than 6 months of age.40 There was some evidence of bene ts on mother-infant interaction, sleeping, and crying. There was no evidence of harm. Because there is no clear-cut de nition what baby massage encompasses, re- sults are dif cult to interpret. In only one study of low quality, the result of baby massage on excessive crying was analyzed.41 A positive effect on crying at age 3 and 6 months was found. These  ndings may be suf cient to support the use of baby massage as method of sup- port; however, more studies are needed.
  e72 | Healio.com/Pediatrics
PEDIATRIC ANNALS 43:4 | APRIL 2014
CME

Fennel Extract and Herbal Tea
The available evidence on alterna- tive medication for excessive crying was discussed in a review.42 One well- conducted study reported bene t from fennel extract compared to placebo, and in another trial, herbal tea containing fennel, licorice, vervain chamomile, and mint signi cantly improved colic scores. However, there were some methodologi- cal concerns. There is some support for the effect of fennel from animal studies. In absence of side effects, these inter- ventions may be supported, although further studies are advised.
TREATMENTS NOT RECOMMENDED
Chiropractic and spinal manipulation are recommended against because of the lack of evidence for their effectiveness, as well as the potentially serious side ef- fects.43,44 Except in cases of proven cow’s milk allergy, change of feeds should be actively discouraged. In a Dutch study, 19% of women who stopped breastfeed- ing gave excessive crying of their infant as their reason for doing so;45 however, the amount of excessive crying was simi- lar in breastfed and bottle-fed infants.46 Furthermore, 17% of the change in arti-  cial feeds was due to crying. These data demonstrate that there is a schism be- tween the reality and parental perception of the effect of feeds on excessive crying. Simethicon has not been proven effective in treating excessive crying.47-49Although there is evidence that babies settle more and better when placed prone, this does not comply with safe sleeping advice for the prevention of cot death and should be actively discouraged.
NEITHER DISCOURAGED NOR ENCOURAGED
Continuous carrying is not part of Western societies’ usual method of baby care but is considered normal behavior in many parts of the world. Picking up a crying baby to console him or her is
normal parental behavior. When babies cry excessively for a longer period, car- rying the child does not seem to reduce the excessive crying.50-52 However, the literature also does not prove that con- tinuous carrying has a negative impact.
Although there is evidence from two randomized, controlled trials for a bene cial role of the probiotic Lacto- bacillus reuteri DSM 17938 for infant colic, it is too soon to recommend its use therapeutically.53,54 It has only been studied in a population of mothers who breastfed at least partially, and both studies were  nanced by the manufac- turer. It is available in some countries as “BioGaia.”
Parents and health care workers can also consciously decide not to try to lessen the burden of crying but to in- stead strengthen the parental coping strategies. Many interventions, such as nurse-family partnerships; neonatal programs, such as Infant Behavioral Assessment and Intervention Program for premature infants; and paramedical care, such as physical therapy, can be used to support parents.55
PREVENTION FOR HIGH-RISK GROUPS
As discussed previously, there are groups of parents and infants who are at high risk of crying excessively. (Table 1). Furthermore, the relative risk for excessive crying increases with decreasing gestational age in preterms compared to term infants. Small for gestational age children also have in- creased risk of excessive crying in all gestational age groups.16
Identifying the groups of parents and infants at increased risk is impor- tant because information on crying can be given before it becomes excessive. Furthermore, early support and, if nec- essary, referral to more specialized care may prevent more serious problems in- cluding child abuse, although no stud- ies are available to con rm this.
LONG-TERM PROGNOSIS
Most of the children who have cried excessively during their  rst 4 months have no increased risks of developing psychological, social, or other problems. Some parents, however, may continue to perceive their child as more vulnerable, temperamental, or more rebellious, even when he or she gets older.27,56
Any child who continues crying after 4 months should be followed up because unsolved excessive crying may disturb the parent-child interaction and regula- tion, which may in turn cause long-last- ing psycho-social or somatic problems.
Research shows that infants who continue to cry after 4 to 6 months are at higher risk for feeding, sleeping, and behavioral problems, among which are hyperactivity and somatic problems.57,58
CONCLUSION
Infants who cry excessively place a large demand on health care. Although there is no consensus on the de nition of excessive crying, health care workers should be aware of the parental percep-
 TABLE 1.
At High Risk for Infantile Excessive Crying and Associated Problems
Pregnant women with anxiety and/or with little support.
Pregnant women with many somatic symptoms.
Parents with much stress or little social support.
Parents with anxiety or other psycho- logical problems.
Parents with depression or other psy- chiatric problems.
Teenage parents.
Parents with addiction.
Parental unemployment; financial
problems.
Premature and/or small for gestational age children.
Children with an especially high, pen- etrating and loud cry.


that is indicative of more serious problems that can arise. The disruption that a crying infant can bring to families and the long-term sequela are often underestimated. Education regarding the normal pattern of crying in infants should be given early on so that parents can have a realistic view of what to ex- pect. If parents still perceive the crying as excessive and medical conditions have been ruled out, support is essential to prevent long-term problems in parent- infant interaction and the ensuing possi- bility of child abuse. Of the many strate- gies to reduce the crying itself, bringing regularity into the system of childcare is the most appropriate  rst choice. Adding interventions such as swaddling, baby massage, and fennel extract are possi- bilities, but more studies should be con- ducted to con rm the bene ts of these practices. The most promising area of research is that into the intestinal microbiota. The randomized, controlled trials that have been conducted seem promising, and there is a relevant biological hypothesis that underlies the interven- tion. Future studies should be conducted with special attention to which probiotic strain is chosen, and results should be corrected for the various risk factors for crying and the type of feeds

Infant colic, or excessive crying of unknown cause, affects up to 20% of infants1 and is a major burden to families and health services. Infant colic is often defined by the Wessel’s criteria of crying or fussing for three hours or more a day for three days or more per week for three weeks in infants aged less than 3 months.2 Although infant colic spontaneously resolves after the first three to four months after birth, it is associated with maternal depression,3 early breastfeeding cessation,4 and shaken baby syndrome.5 Infant distress is one of the most common presenting problems to primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare sectors, costing the UK healthcare system millions of pounds annually.6

The cause of infant colic remains elusive despite decades of research. Psychosocial hypotheses include poor maternal-infant interactions, maternal anxiety and depression, and difficult infant temperament.7 Gastrointestinal theories include increased intra-abdominal gas, hyperperistalsis, and visceral pain.7 One study has suggested that infants with colic may have increased faecal calprotectin levels,8 suggesting a possible role for gut inflammation; however, another study suggested no differences in faecal calprotectin levels between infants with and infants without colic.9

No single effective treatment for colic exists, and most clinical guidelines recommend support and reassurance as the mainstay of management.10 11 12 13 The use of hypoallergenic formulas or elimination of cow’s milk protein from the diet of mothers who are breast feeding may possibly be effective,10 11 12 yet not all irritable infants respond.14 15 Anticholinergic drugs (for example, dicycloverine (dicyclomine)) are effective16 17 18 but have potentially dangerous side effects, including breathing difficulties and coma.19 An effective, practical, and acceptable intervention for infant colic would represent a major advance in clinical and public health.

Recently, research into the use of probiotics (live micro-organisms that confer a health benefit) for colic has been rapidly gaining momentum. Infants with colic are reported to have increased concentrations of gas forming organisms and proteobacteria such as Escherichia coli in their gut.8 20 21 22 Colonisation with certain intestinal micro-organisms, such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus species, along with increased intestinal microbial diversity, may protect against infant distress.8 23 Probiotics enhance the mucosal barrier and promote microbial diversity in the gut.24 25 They may reduce concentrations of proteobacteria and gas forming coliform and reduce intestinal inflammation.26 27 28 29 30 A recent meta-analysis of three small, randomised controlled trials of breastfed infants with colic reported that Lactobacillus reuteri noticeably reduced crying time at 21 days post supplementation.31 However, one trial was unblinded,32 two included only infants with mothers on dairy-free diets, 32 33 and none used validated measures of infant distress. No trials have included formula fed infants, which is relevant because colic is associated with early breastfeeding cessation.4 Despite these major limitations, the use of probiotics for colic has been rapidly taken up internationally. An urgent need exists for a larger, more rigorous trial that includes infants unselected for feeding method to clarify whether L reuteri is effective for infant colic in the general population.

We determined whether the probiotic L reuteri DSM 17938 benefited infants aged less than 3 months (<13 weeks) with colic, irrespective of feeding mode. We also examined its effect on gut microbiota, faecal calprotectin levels, and E coli colonisation, all implicated in the mechanism of disease. We hypothesised that compared with the placebo (control) group, the L reuteri (treatment) group would show lower mean daily cry or fuss time at 1 month (primary outcome), and at 7, 14, and 21 days, and 6 months, and fewer daily episodes of cry or fuss (7, 14, 21 days, 1 and 6 months); longer infant sleep duration (7, 14, 21 days, 1 and 6 months); better mean scores on a standardised measure of maternal mental health; better mean scores on a standardised measure of infant (6 months) and family functioning (1 and 6 months); better mean scores on a standardised measure of parent quality adjusted life years (1 and 6 months); and changes in gut microbiota (increased faecal microbial diversity, less E coli colonisation (1 month), and reduced faecal calprotectin levels (1 month)). We hypothesised that these effects would be sustained within the breastfed group and formula fed group of infants.